---
title: prior art
layout: post
---
I got pretty fired up last week when I started thinking about designing an IDE
and interface builder in the browser, for touch. I hadn't done much research to
see what already existed in this space, but I was familiar with Squeak,
a Smalltalk environment written in Smalltalk.  

It turns out that there already is a system that is effectively Squeak ported
to Javascript: the Lively Kernel. 

<iframe src="http://blip.tv/play/g_MngvTbawI.x?p=1" width="720" height="433" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe><embed type="application/x-shockwave-flash" src="http://a.blip.tv/api.swf#g_MngvTbawI" style="display:none"></embed>

The lively kernel seems, on the surface, to satisfy most of the desires I had
when I talked about "dynabook software" last week. After all, Squeak was
heavily inspired by the Dynabook concept and contributed to by Alan Kay himself.
However, there's two critical differences between what I'd like to have and the
Lively Kernel environment. 

One, it's a little slow under load. You can see it in the video above, when Dr.
Ingalls starts really taxing it by live-editing the synthesizer and the engine
simulation, but it especially struggles on mobile systems like my iPad, even
while single-tasking. I haven't figured out whether that's a function of the
resolution, the processor, or both. I need to do some more profiling work
to find out for sure. Two, the software is not designed for touch. This may
seem like a trivial difference, but I'd argue that touch interfaces have
the potential to be the best out of those we have access to technologically
right now, and we have to work with what we've got before we can move on to
[something better](worrydream.com/ABriefRantOnTheFutureOfInteractionDesign/). 
Third, my final goal with this project is simply becoming a better programmer by
taking on ambitious but tractable projects, and the Lively Kernel serves
as an existence proof of the fact that this is a tractable problem, making
it *more* attractive for my needs, not less. 


So, in short, yes, prior art exists, but that doesn't mean I can't improve on it. Facebook's React library (and 
its novel approach to rendering to the DOM) will probably play a pivotal role
in that. I need to spend some time looking into the Morphic graphics model, and
verify that it might be improved by doing this work. Maybe that's another
direction this project can take: modifying the view layer of the Lively
Kernel's Morphic implementation to use React. We'll see.
